---
title: He Has Risen
author: Wade Allen
date: April 20, 2014
scripture: Matthew 28:1-10
summary: The resurrected Christ appears first to a small group of women. Their response is appropriate. They worship and carry the news to others. As we come to Resurrection Sunday, may we respond in like ways.
categories: Easter
---

# Risen from the Dead? #

Do any of you guys know of Professor C. E. M. Joad
He was a British celebrity around WWII

A philosopher, he popularized philosophy through a radio show called The Brains Trust

He was once asked if he could meet any person throughout history
who would he meet?

His answer was Jesus
he wanted to ask him the most important question in the world: 
'Did you or did you not rise from the dead?'

This is an important question
The implications of this question are huge

They are huge today, as they were in WWII, as they were in the 1st century

Is this even possible?
Did Jesus rise from the dead?

Think about it, dead people don't come back to life
There is no such claim throughout all the religions of the world

Nothing in Judaism is close to this claim
Nothing in the Greco-Roman world of the NT claimed that people rose from the dead

Sure, there were mythical stories, but people did not really believe these stories

But here is a person that everyone knew
He was walking around, people knew of him
He was publicly crucified
Everyone knew that he was dead

Then three days later, his followers claimed that he was alive
and for the next six weeks, people claimed that they saw him, spoke to him

This morning, we are going to look at one account
It is the account of two women

# Women #

In Matthew 28, Matthew writes of this tremendous event
He begins in v. 1
√ After the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb. (Matthew 28:1 NIV)
Matthew begins the story with the account of two women

Let me mention that we have many accounts of the resurrection
Paul mentions them in 1 Corinthians 15
√ For what I received I passed on to you as of first importance: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures,  4 that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures,  5 and that he appeared to Peter, and then to the Twelve.  6 After that, he appeared to more than five hundred of the brothers at the same time, most of whom are still living, though some have fallen asleep.  7 Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles,  8 and last of all he appeared to me also, as to one abnormally born. 
Paul is making the case that would stand up in a court of law
Do you notice what is missing from his list?

Paul does not mention the women
It is not that Paul is against women, but Paul knows that their testimony was not something that would stand up for many people of his day

Women were regarded as nobodies in these days
they were considered property in some cases; in some places offered for sale; 
they could not bear witness in a court of law

Isn't it interesting that God choses women as the first witnesses to the resurrection
That is just like God
He chose a manger as Jesus' crib
He chose shepherds as the first visitor (the least regarded of the day, stinky, smelly)

As I was writing this sermon
I was sitting in Starbucks
It was early in the morning and everyone was in to get coffee
The place was packed (no seats)

A gentleman walked in who did not smell very good
I don't know if he was homeless, but his clothes were tattered
Because there were no seats, he came and sat with me at my table

How ironic
Just as I was typing these words about shepherds being smelly
I was reminded of what this would have been like
This is the fragrance of God
He dips into the smelly, the dirty, the no so pleasant

That is how he worked at Jesus' birth
this is how he works at the resurrection

# Going to the Tomb #

But this time the smell is a better
Why were the women coming to the tomb?

Matthew simply tells us they came to see Jesus' body
But Mark gives us a little more detail
 √ When the Sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go to anoint Jesus' body. 2) Very early on the first day of the week, just after sunrise, they were on their way to the tomb (Mark 16:1-2 NIV)
The Sabbath is on Saturday and when the sun sets, the Sabbath is over
Remember the day in Jewish culture goes from sunset to sunset (not from midnight to midnight)
So Saturday at sunset, the women would have been allowed to buy spices
So they go to the spice dealer and get the goods

But it is night and it would make no sense to go to the tomb until morning
so they wait

Back to Matthew
√ After the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb. (Matthew 28:1 NIV)
They go to the tomb to anoint Jesus' body
This is what women did in this day
This is customary

Who are these women that Matthew is talking about?
You might have noticed that Matthew mentions Mary and the other Mary
Mark mentions three women, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome

Mark also tells us that they were worried about how they would get in the tomb
√ and they asked each other, "Who will roll the stone away from the entrance of the tomb?"  (Mark 16:3 NIV)
Matthew continues to describe the event
 √ There was a violent earthquake, for an angel of the Lord came down from heaven and, going to the tomb, rolled back the stone and sat on it. (Matthew 28:2 NIV)
The women did not have to worry for long
Because God had taken care of this already

Matthew is making a connection here with another earthquake
do you remember what happened when Jesus died?
an earthquake
√ When the centurion and those with him who were guarding Jesus saw the earthquake and all that had happened, they were terrified, and exclaimed, "Surely he was the Son of God!"  (Matthew 27:54 NIV)
So an earthquake marks Jesus' death
and now an earthquake marks his resurrection
Back to Matthew 28:2
 √ There was a violent earthquake, for an angel of the Lord came down from heaven and, going to the tomb, rolled back the stone and sat on it. (Matthew 28:2 NIV)
How did the earthquake happen?
It was a result of the angel of the Lord rolling the stone back
He makes the earth shake, rolls the stone to the side and sits on it

Then Matthew describes what the angel looks like
√ His appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were white as snow. (Matthew 28:3 NIV)
Do you remember a few weeks ago as we talked about the Transfigured Jesus?
Same wording here
The angel is not from around here
He has all the characteristics of being exalted, from heaven
White, but not just white (like lightning)
White, but not just white (like snow)

You don't normally see that sort of white
and it freaks those out who are seeing this happen
Matthew tells us
√ The guards were so afraid of him that they shook and became like dead men.  (Matthew 28:4 NIV)
Can you see the humor in his words?
Jesus is the one who is supposed to be dead
But these guys, who are guarding the dead are 'like dead men'
And the one who is supposed to be dead is not dead :)

Evidently the women are pretty freaked out too
So the angel speaks to them
√ The angel said to the women, "Do not be afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified. (Matthew 28:5 NIV)
I know why you are here
I know you are looking for Jesus

Again, the angel points out that Jesus was crucified
He was dead
You are looking for him
He is supposed to be in the tomb

Crucified people are in tombs
That is where they are





# Risen from the Dead! #

√ He is not here; he has risen, just as he said. Come and see the place where he lay.  (Matthew 28:6 NIV)
He is supposed to be here
But he is not
He has risen!

These are three of the most powerful words of all of Scripture
These words form the basis of the entire Christian faith

The angel reminds the women that Jesus had said that he would rise

Jesus does not rise at this point
He has already risen

Have you ever thought that the stone was rolled away so that Jesus could get out of the tomb?
That apparently is not the case

The stone is rolled away so that the women can see in the tomb

Nowhere in Scripture do we find anyone who sees Jesus rise from the dead
They only see the result of Jesus rising from the dead

The earthquake was to remove the stone so that people could see what happened

How could this happen?
How can a dead person rise from the dead?

Think about his for a minute
We all die, right
We die because of sin

All the way back in the garden, we find that death is a result of sin
We all sinned, so we die

But what if someone never sinned
Would they still have to die?

No, they would not have to die
But what if they chose to die?
Their dying would have the power to break the curse of death

And that is exactly what Jesus did
He, perfect (no sin) submitted to death (a death that he did not have to die)
and because of this, he had power over death
Death could not hold him

Paul quotes one of the earliest Christian hymns in Philippians 2
√ made himself nothing, taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness. 8) And being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to death --- even death on a cross! 9) Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name, 10) that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, 11) and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.  (Philippians 2:7-11 NIV)
The women coming to the tomb that morning were able to see what had happened
God shook the earth
He opened the tomb for all to see

When did Jesus rise from the dead?
We don't know, no one saw this happen
They only saw the result of it

But the angel had seen it
Perhaps he saw it from heaven
He, along with all of redeemed Creation, saw it take place

Death (the curse) broken
It was what the Father, the Son, the Spirit had been longing for since Adam and Eve ate the apple
The mission was accomplished
Death is defeated

He has risen! Just as he said!
Come on in
Take a look
Check it out for yourself

# Go! #

Look at what the angel tells them to do next
√ Then go quickly and tell his disciples: 'He has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see him.' Now I have told you."  (Matthew 28:7 NIV)
You can imagine that the women are in shock
They are trying to take it all in
They can't quite wrap their minds around what they are seeing, hearing, experiencing

Could you?

The angel instructs them to tell the disciples

It is pretty cool that God chose to reveal what he has done to the women first
They had been the ones to stick with Jesus through the entire ordeal

The disciples abandoned him (all except John)
But the women stuck it out, they did not leave him

And here the women are the first to attend to his body
And God reveals to them that Jesus has risen

But God is not going to keep this a secret
He is going to also appear to the disciples, so the women are instructed to go and tell the disciples what they have seen

Look at what they are to say
'He has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see him.'
This is exactly what Jesus told the disciples before he died
√ But after I have risen, I will go ahead of you into Galilee."  (Matthew 26:32 NIV)
The angel finishes his statement with
Now, I have said it, I have done what I am supposed to do
He has a message and he has delivered it (the word angel means messenger)

Matthew describes the women going
√ So the women hurried away from the tomb, afraid yet filled with joy, and ran to tell his disciples. (Matthew 28:8 NIV)
Look at the emotions here
They are hurrying (The angel said to go quickly)
They are afraid

Look at how Mark describes the women leaving
√ Trembling and bewildered, the women went out and fled from the tomb. They said nothing to anyone, because they were afraid.  (Mark 16:8 NIV)
Sure, they are freaked out
No doubt
They are not sure what the implications of this are going to be
They are not sure how the religious leaders are going to respond
Remember what these ladies have experienced
They have watched Jesus nailed to a cross
they have been traumatized

Mark tells us that they are in this state of fear

But Matthew adds that 
√ So the women hurried away from the tomb, afraid yet filled with joy, and ran to tell his disciples. (Matthew 28:8 NIV)
Yes, they are afraid
but there is an element of joy

The word joy is a word that is not used too much in Scripture
Outside the parables, Matthew only uses this word twice
The one time is here
The other is when the Magi find Jesus
√ When they saw the star, they were overjoyed.  (Matthew 2:10 NIV)
Freaked out, running, afraid, yet full of joy
All kinds of emotions
You can imagine


# Meeting Jesus #

But the story does not end there
Let's keep reading
√ Suddenly Jesus met them. "Greetings," he said. (Matthew 28:9 NIV)
Matthews language is quick
The angels told them to go 'quickly'
They 'hurry'
and 'Suddenly' Jesus meets them

As Matthew records the scene, it is like watching a movie when the frame is moving fast from one scene to the next
Maybe the women described it all to Matthew:
'It all happened so fast'

We were scared, we were moving as fast as we could, we were not sure what was going to happen next
and all of a sudden
there he was!

One scholar points out that most of the time people meet with Jesus
Jesus the object
People come to Jesus

But here the language is different
Jesus meets with them
Jesus is the subject

They are not looking for Jesus, he shows up
No doubt, they are privileged
No doubt, Jesus comes to them

All their fear, All there doubt
All their trauma, All the confusion of what is going on
It is all secondary now

Jesus is there
Jesus meets with them

Look at how they respond
√ They came to him, clasped his feet and worshiped him. (Matthew 28:9 NIV) 
When they saw him, they went to him
and what did they do
They grabbed his feet

to clasp someones feet is an intimate sign of submission
You may remember the women anointing Jesus' feet at the home of Lazarus

Luke described the women at Lazarus' home
√ and as she stood behind him at his feet weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears. Then she wiped them with her hair, kissed them and poured perfume on them. (Luke 7:38 NIV)
Same sort of deal here
They grab his feet

√ and the other verb that Matthew uses is and worshiped him (kai prosekynēsan autō)
This same verb is used to describe the wise men
and asked, "Where is the one who has been born king of the Jews? We saw his star in the east and have come to worship him."  (Matthew 2:2 NIV)
√ Then those who were in the boat worshiped him, saying, "Truly you are the Son of God."  (Matthew 14:33 NIV)
This word has to do with a recognition that Jesus is the Son of God
and when the women see him, they grab his feet and worship him

One of the most puzzling passages in Scripture is in Mt 28
√ When they saw him, they worshiped him; but some doubted.  (Matthew 28:17 NIV)
Matthew is talking about people who see the resurrected Jesus
and he contrasts those worshiping and those doubting

This passage is puzzling because how could you be standing before the resurrected Jesus and doubt?
I guess they don't believe what they are experiencing
It is just too much to take in

But when the women see the resurrected Jesus
They clearly believe, the get it, they worship
to worship is the appropriate response

it is a confession/response that Jesus is God
it is a confession/response that Jesus is who he says he is

# Don't Fear #

We really don't know how longs this lasts
But Matthew tells us what happens next
√ Then Jesus said to them, "Do not be afraid. Go and tell my brothers to go to Galilee; there they will see me."  (Matthew 28:10 NIV)
Why did Jesus tell them to not fear
What were they afraid of?

You have to wonder if perhaps their greatest fear is that people would not believe them
They were women
They had no credibility

What if we go back and people consider us insane
Don't be afraid, Jesus says

and then Jesus refers to the disciples
What did he call them?
'my brothers'

Jesus is not ticked off at them because they abandoned him
Jesus considers his relationship with them still 'my brothers'

They are going to experience what you have experienced
They are going to see also
They are going to believe also

No need to fear

It is one thing to see an empty tomb, to hear the message from the angel
But it is quite another to meet with Jesus himself

and now the women have the assurance of the risen Christ from the risen Christ himself


# Conclusion #

√ What a story!
What do we do with this?

This account has implications for us today

1. First of all, we see that Jesus cares for the humble, the lowly

Jesus could have made his first appearance to the religious leaders
See!  I told you that I was God
Here I am, take that

He could have appeared to the Roman soldiers who crucified him
Look guys, here are the nails that you drove into my hands
It didn't stick this time
Your killing machine could not kill me

He could have appeared first to the men
They were the ones who carried the world's credibility

But Jesus came first to the women (the lowly) by society's standards

Are you in a place where you are not sure if you deserve God?
Do you feel far from him today?
Jesus comes to the least likely
He comes to those that feel like they don't deserve him

Maybe you are weighed down by sin this morning
You showed up at church because it is Easter, but you feel nervous here, uncomfortable
You feel like God could never forgive your sin
Hear the message of this text
Jesus will forgive (just as he called his disciples "brothers")

2. Secondly, we learn that the only appropriate response to the risen Christ is worship

Their response should be our response
worship is simply confessing that Jesus is God

Maybe you feel like you can't worship
Maybe you feel far from God today, out of touch
Won't you worship the risen Christ
Won't you fall at His feet and proclaim, "you are God!"

Here we are, a humble group of believers, gathered in this place
No fireworks, No American Idol attention
We are gathered:
Simply
worshiping
believing

Jesus is less interested in Super Bowl crowds
He simply wants our worship

Yes, we confess and proclaim this morning that Jesus is Risen
We confess this morning that because he is risen, He is Lord

3. Lastly, this morning, this text reminds us of the center of our faith
Yes, indeed, He has Risen

Mr. Joad,
Yes, he is risen from the dead

and because of that, we have hope like never have before
we have assurance that our own death is temporary
the curse is broken, death is defeated, the world is going to be made right again

This is the message of the risen Christ
May we live it, not only today to every day in all that we do

May we humbly take this message into our world (our offices, our schools, our relationships)
as we leave this place

Prayer

Introduce Arch